# Chapter One
# A Message and a Leader

# Paganism Ruled the Ancient Civilizations

The history of the mankind is sorrowful. Ever since Adam (عليه السلام), May Peace be upon him, and his children descended on earth, as time went by and civilizations flourished and generations rose on the remains of others, humans have been a motley mixture. If one day they are on the right track, they are lost for days soon after, and if they see the light of truth once, then the darkness of falsehood engulfs them many times (thereafter). If we were to scrutinize the history of the mankind in the light of belief in Allah (ﷻ) and preparation for the Hereafter, we should find the world closely resembling a drunkard whose periods of drunkenness exceed his sobriety, or a sick man who is delirious and does not know what he says.

Although in experiences with themselves and their world, there are men's many deterrents from committing evil and many incentives to do good, but overwhelming passion cannot be subdued by knowledge alone.

How much of the world's life expired before the appearance of Muhammad (ﷺ)? Many centuries brought a wealth of experience and knowledge and encouraged the growth of the arts and sciences, philosophies and ideas. In spite of that, however, frivolity became the rule and many nations fell without achieving the status to which they aspired.

Look at the fate of the civilizations of Egypt and Greece, India and China, Persia and Rome. I do not mean their fate from the political point of view, but from the aspect of feelings and reason. Contemptible paganism destroyed them and made them fall into this miserable pit. And the human being, whom Allah (ﷻ) appointed as His superior vicegerent in the heavens and on the earth, became a slave subservient to the lowliest thing in these places. What else could there be after cows and calves are hallowed, wood and stones are worshipped? Entire nations became polluted with such perversions. Paganism comes from within the self and not from the environment. Just as sad people apply their feelings to their surroundings and frightened people imagine objects to be ghosts, similarly deformed personalities will apply their stupidity and sterility to their surroundings, and deify the stones and the animals.

Only when the small heart widens, the dormant thought awakens and people return to their lofty ideals, these pagan impressions will disappear automatically. Thus, the first work for the faith is within men and women themselves, for it is of no benefit in the fight against paganism simply to slaughter the holy cows and smash the proud idols while hearts remain in their previous darkness. The worshippers will just search for other gods to bow before and make offerings. There are many pagans in this world, though they have never met over an altar, and how quickly they ignore the real presence of their Lord and run after some new illusion.

Superstition does not follow its course in life by announcing its falsehood and exposing its nonsense. It conceals its shamelessness with the clothing of earnestness. It borrows the accepted wear of truth and may even adopt some of its premises and conclusions before adorning itself for the gullible. This is how paganism acts. It attacks the true religion and its plain realities, not as the bee attacks the flowers of spring, but as the worms break down and waste a fertile soil. Or locusts attack the luxurious gardens and turn them into barren wastelands. Now, if it corrupts what it leaves, then it will not correct what it takes, and if what it takes was good before it reached it, then it will become harmful after it has been turned into poison in its stomach. This is the secret why paganism, which does not know Allah (ﷻ), claims to come closer to Him and seek His pleasure through its idols: a portion of truth in portions of falsehood, in a context which definitely diverts people from Allah (ﷻ) and removes them from Allah's presence.

The greatest catastrophe which befell the religions on account of the pagan attack on them was the terrible changes affecting the religion of Isa (Jesus), son of Maryam (Mary). They turned its day into darkness and its peace into distress; they turned unity into idolatry, degraded the human race and hung its upliftment on a sacrifice. They turned the ideology of Jesus into a hotchpotch of unnatural beliefs, myths and legends. The myth of the Trinity and redemption was revived after early paganism succeeded in thrusting it upon the new Christianity. In this way it gained two victories: it strengthened itself and it led others astray. Thus when the sixth century of the Christian era arrived, the lights of guidance throughout the world had gone out and Satan was traversing the vast expanses of land, admiring the thorns he had planted and seeing how sturdy they had grown.

Magianism in Persia was stubborn vanguard of the widespread idolatry in China, India, the Arab countries and all parts of the ignorant globe. Christianity, which vehemently opposed it, borrowed most prominent characteristics feature the myths of the ancient Indians and Egyptians. It ascribed a wife and a child to Allah (ﷻ) and seduced its followers in Rome, Egypt and Constantinople with a kind of polytheism more advanced than that of the fire-worshippers and the idol-worshippers: a polytheism mixed with monotheism and fighting pure polytheism! What is the value of these contradictions which Christianity collected together?

(They [Jews, Christians and pagans] say: "Allah has begotten a son [children]." Glory is to Him! He is Rich [Free of all needs]. His is all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth. No warrant you have for this. Do you say against Allah what you know not. Say: "Verily, those who invent a lie against Allah will never be successful." [A brief] enjoyment in this world! And then unto Us will be their return, then We shall make them taste the severest torment because they used to disbelieve [in Allah, belie His Messengers, deny and challenge His Ayat (proofs, signs, verses, etc)].)(Qur'ān 10: 68-70)

It seems that the bond of polytheism which linked the pagan religions to the distorted heavenly religions is what made them allies in the bid to destroy the Muslims from the day the latter began establishing their community on the basis of the worship of the One True God. Allah (ﷻ) cautioned this Ummah on the persecution which would befall them from the idol-worshipers and from the People of the Book at the same time, and He advised them to fortify themselves with patience and steadfastness in the face of this intolerance:

(Assuredly you will be tried in your property and in your persons, and you will hear much wrong from those who were given the Scripture before you, and from the idolators. But if you persevere and ward off [evil], then that is of the steadfast heart of things.) (Qur'ān 3: 186)

The darkness which engulfed the hearts and minds in the absence of the lights of tawhid contained in it also traditions of society and the systems of government. Thus the earth was a den haunted by murder and destruction where the weak had no hope of peace and tranquillity. And what good could be expected from paganism which rejected reason, forgot Allah (ﷻ) and yielded to the hands of imposters?

It would not be strange if Allah (ﷻ) refused to help them, as the Ḥadīth says:

"Allah (ﷻ) verily looked at the people on earth and detested them all, both Arabs and non-Arabs except some remnants of the People of the Book." (From a long Ḥadīth narrated by Muslim)

It was these remains which were impenetrable by polytheism in spite of the tidal wave of unbelief which flooded the hills and valleys. Before the prophethood of Muhammad (ﷺ), the world was drowned in confusion and misery which weighed heavily on people's shoulders.

You came, while the people were in chaos: if you had passed by them you would have seen them worshipping idol upon idol.

The king of Rome oppressed his people and the king of Persia was deaf and blind from pride.

Finally Allah (ﷻ) announced that He (ﷻ) would wipe out these traces and send His (ﷻ) choicest guidance to creation. He (ﷻ) sent Muhammad (ﷺ).

# The Nature of the Final Message

The prophethood of Muhammad (ﷺ) had the unique characteristic of being global and eternal. Allah (ﷻ) was capable of sending a warner to every village and a guide in every age. Now if the towns are always in need of warners and the ages in need of guides, then why were they substituted by a single man? The truth is that this substitution resembles the brevity which contains many meanings in just a few words. The prophethood of Muhammad (ﷺ) was a complete substitution for the sending of an army of prophets distributed throughout the ages and the wide world. In fact, it filled the need for sending an angel to every person who lived and will live on this earth for as long as people look forward to guidance and salvation.

How is that? On a dangerous ground a sincere adviser may tell you: "Close your eyes and follow me," or, "Do not ask me about anything which arouses your attention." Safety may be in obeying him, thus you would prefer to walk behind him until you cross into a safe territory. In this case he is your appointed guide, who thinks and sees for you and who takes you by your hand. If he dies, so do you. However, if at the beginning a wise person comes to you, maps the itinerary, warns you of the dangerous places, shows you in detail what stages and difficulties you have to pass through and walks with you for a while in order to give you practical guidance in what you have learnt, then, in this case, you would be your own guide capable of relying on your own sight and reasoning. The first case is suited to children and simple-minded people, but the second case is to be applied when dealing with people of understanding.

When Allah (ﷻ) sent Muhammad (ﷺ) to guide the world, He ensured that the message contained the principles which would open doors for intelligent people to understand what was and what would be. The Qur'an which He (ﷻ) sent down on the Prophet's (ﷺ) heart is a Book from the Lord of the Worlds to all living people to guide them to goodness and inspire them with uprightness. Muhammad (ﷺ) was not a leader of tribes, people who were good because he was good, and when he died they faded away. He was a force of goodness which played a role in the moral world similar to the role played in the material world by the discovery of steam and electricity. His appointment as Prophet (ﷺ) represented a stage in the evolution of the mankind. Before that, people under the guardianship of their keepers were like confined children. Then they grew up and became capable of bearing responsibility themselves. So Allah's message came to them, through the agency of Muhammad (ﷺ), and explained how they should live on earth and return to heaven. Thus whether Muhammad (ﷺ) remained or went away, it would not take anything away from his real Message which opened eyes and ears and sharpened perceptions and minds, and it was all contained in his huge legacy of the Qur'an and Sunnah.

He was not sent to collect a set of people around him but to forge a link between creation and the truth by which their existence would be meaningful; between them and the light by which they would see their goal. So those who recognize the truth in their lives and walk among people with a light, have definitely acknowledged Muhammad (ﷺ), have taken shelter under his banner, even if they have never seen nor lived with their guide.

(O mankind! Verily, there has come to you a convincing proof [Prophet Muhammad] from your Rabb, and We sent down to you a manifest light [this Qur'an]. So, as for those who believed in Allah and held fast to Him, He will admit them to His Mercy and Grace [i.e. Paradise], and guide them to Himself by the Straight Path.) (Qur'ān 4: 174-175)

So if you see children ignoring their teacher's lessons or clinging to his clothes while he is alive or holding onto his belongings after he is dead, then know that he is unworthy children. He is not fit to be addressed by the teaching of the Message, let alone standing firmly on its path.

In the Prophet's (ﷺ) mosque in Madīnah I saw throngs of people seeking proximity to his grave and longing to spend their lives beside it. If the Prophet (ﷺ) came out alive and saw them he would abhor the sight of them and hate to be near them. Their shabby appearance, their lack of knowledge, their idleness and negligence, make their relationship with the Prophet of Islām (ﷺ) weaker than the web of a spider.

I said to them: "What do you gain from being near the Prophet (ﷺ) and what does he gain from you?"

Those who understand his Message and live it beyond the sands and seas know the secret of the Prophet (ﷺ) better than you. It is a spiritual and mental proximity which forms the only bond between Muhammad (ﷺ) and those who are related to him. So how could sick spirits and feeble minds be related to him who came to deposit the good health of religion and the world in the spirits and minds? Is this proximity the sign of love and the means of forgiveness? You will never love for Allāh's sake unless you first know Allah (ﷻ). The natural sequence is that before anything else you should know who is your Rabb and what is your faith. When you know this with a clean mind you will appreciate with a grateful heart the kindness of the one who conveyed the Message of Allah (ﷻ) to you and bore hardships on your account. That is the meaning of the Ḥadīth: "Love Allah (ﷻ) for the bounties He (ﷻ) provides you with and love me for the love of Allah (ﷻ)"; and the meaning of the Qur'anic verse:

(Say [O Muhammad to mankind]: If you [really] love Allah, then follow me; Allah will love you and forgive you of your sins. Allah is oft-Forgiving, All-Merciful.) (Qur'ān 3: 31)

Then again, the Prophet of Islam (ﷺ) did not appoint himself as a "gateway" for forgiveness and blessings. He never did so for a single day, because he was never implicated in swindling. He tells you either to go with him or go along with someone else, and let us all stand before Allah (ﷻ) and pray to Him (ﷻ):

(You [Alone] we worship, and You [Alone] we ask for help [for each and everything]. Show us the straight path; The path of those whom You have favoured; Not the path of those who deserve Your anger nor of those who go astray.) (Qur'ān 1: 5-7)

So if this Prophet (ﷺ) is pleased with you, he will pray to Allah (ﷻ) for you; and if you are pleased with him and acknowledge his great work and status in your heart, then pray to Allah (ﷻ) for him likewise. You will be participating with the angels, who recognize his greatness and pray for his increased reward:

(Look! Allah and His angels shower blessings on the Prophet. You who believe! Ask for blessings on him and salute him with a worthy salutation.) (Qur'ān 33: 56)

It is not Muhammad's task to drag you to paradise with a rope. His task is only to implant insight into your heart to see the truth within. His means of doing that is a Book which falsehood can never approach either from in front or behind, which is easy to remember and safe from deviation. That is the secret of the permanency in his message.

Let us see, therefore, how the Prophet (ﷺ) treated the environment in which he was born, in the light of this essential nature of his message, and let us before that look at the conditions of this environment itself.
